---
layout: default_blog
title:  "Downloading VS Stealing"
date:   2017-10-09 12:00:00 -0500
categories: Writing
tags: Thoughts
---

Many people unfairly equivocate downloading a copyrighted work with common law
stealing. While many developed nations, the United States included, consider
this sort of downloading to be against the law, the question being considered
today is whether or not this downloading is unethical. 

First, a brief description on the difference between illegal and unethical. 
According to [Merriam Webster](https://www.merriam-webster.com), illegal is
defined as "not according to or authorized by law" while unethical is defined as
"not conforming to a high moral standard". So, for an action to be illegal it
must be against a written law, whereas an action must be considered immoral to
be ethically wrong. Now, a definition of moral will be helpful here, "sanctioned by one's conscience".

So, while legallity is based on written laws which are notoriously hard to change,
ethical is based on one's own belief of what is right and wrong. And, as can be
seen
[here](http://www.wiringthebrain.com/2011/06/where-do-morals-come-from.html),
the morals of one person come from those around the individual. Once we agree
upon that, it is not that far of a jump to conclude that a law is a cemented
moral based upon a specific point in time. As anyone who's ever watched the
American political system flounder to change the laws put into place by the
previous administration has learned, laws are difficult to change simply because
they are easily defended by those who they protect. 

What does this mean? Well, it means that while morals evolve based on what a
geoup of people currently think, laws are based upon what a group decided to
write down at some point in the past. This means that there is going to
naturally be some drift between the two of these points. And due to the
difficulty of of changing the written laws, the gap only increases over time. So
while everyone can agree, at least within the United States, that downloading 
content that you don't currently have an agreement to have access to is illegal
the real question is to whether this same act is unethical.

This depends entirely upon what society currently thinks, and I think that the
argument can be made that society agrees that downloading is not stealing which
goes back to the definition of stealing. The definition of stealing is defined
as follows: party A has an item, and party B doesn't; Party B then takes the
item from party A; Now party B has it and party A doesn't. This is a zero sum
problem, where only one party can have the item at once. That's why common theft
is considered both illegal and unethical as it means that one person's loss is
another person's gain.

Downloading an item, such as an mp3 file, is not zero sum however. If I take an
mp3, copy it, and give it to a friend I still have my copy of the mp3 and now
someone else does too. This means that both parties have the file, resulting in
one person's gain and another person's neutral. I think everyone can agree that
between having a zero sum vs a positive sum outcome, the positive sum is more
desired. And if the outcome is more desired, there is absolutely no reason that
it should be made, or continue to be, against the law. And I think that most of
current American society would agree with me [source
1](http://www.dailytech.com/Nearly+Half+of+Americans+Pirate+Casually+But+Pirates+Purchase+More+Legal+Content/article29702.htm)
[source
2](https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2011/11/its-official-america-a-land-of-young-casual-pirates/). So it looks like it might be time to update those laws America.

Now, this post only covers whether the act of piracy is immoral or not, it does
not cover the concept of the different kinds of things that can be stolen. These
can include traditional copy-righted works like artwork, songs, photographs,
etc. This can also include more intellectual works that are protected by
patents. These will be explored within auxilary posts. Stay tuned.
