---
layout: default_blog
title:  "Found Vs Made Photography"
date:   2018-02-12 12:00:00 -0400
categories: Writing
tags: Photography
reading_time: 20 Minutes
card_image: /img/post_images/made_vs_found.jpg
card_image_credit: Photo by Cameron Kirby on Unsplash
---

There is a common misconception today that photography as an art form is a medium akin to painting or drawing, thus allowing the photographer to share their vision of the world with those who view the work. While it is true that viewing a photo does allow one to see how the world appears to the artist, there is no reason to believe that the artist is creating that world. Considering other mediums of art, using painting as an example, when the artist sets out to capture their subject exactly as how it is seen, the subject can often appear different in the final product. That's not to say that the artist set out to modify the subject, however it is often unavoidable. For example, when painting a flower, there are a few things that can be changed from reality without the artist noticing. The easiest of these for others to see would be the color of the flower, for even if the artist matches the color they see entirely accurately there is no guarantee that the color is true to how others perceive it. Again, this is not a mistake made by the artist, it is simply the reality of relying on the human eye to accurately detect color.

In contrast, when using a camera with sufficient technology this is impossible as the camera will capture the true color of the object regardless of what it's operator sees. One of the wonders of photography though is that through the magic of post-processing, either digital or analog, it is possible for the artist to change how the colors or even subjects appear within the photo. This single aspect distinguishes photography as being different as it allows for two different categories of photography to exist, that of the found image and that of the made image.

The found image is often what most photographers start with when they first begin taking photos. A found image is one that represents what the artist saw in front of them at the time of hitting the shutter, but also relies upon the content of the photo having been there before the photographer decided to take the image. Many start here as it is relatively easy to just walk around capturing images of what's in front of you. That is not to say though, that capturing a good found image is easy; This requires being in the right place at the right time, and for the photographer to have a sense of how the image will look before taking it.

Arguably the most well-known form of found photography is street photography. The image of a photographer walking the streets of a big city and snapping pictures of the interesting things going on around them is a familiar one to anyone that's paid attention to photography. This is also the style of photography that was common in the mid twentieth century, as it allowed those that lived within New York City to share the wonders of the big city with those in America who didn't. As the street photographer must act quickly to capture the events unfolding around them, there is little room for them to make the images into something they aren't.

The other well-known genre of found photography is landscape photography, where exactly as it sounds the photographer goes out and captures the landscape in front of them. This can be anything from a sweeping mountain range to a lush forest or a city off in the distance. It's with these images though where a beginner photographer may start drifting into made photography. Most people when trying to make their photography better delve into learning how to "post-process" their images. In landscape photography, one may not see it as a big deal to simply make the green of the trees a little greener, or the water in the lake a little blue-er, however by doing so they are manipulating the image to be different from what the naked eye sees.

There is nothing wrong with photographers doing this, it is simply good to note that when doing so a photographer moves from showing his surroundings to showing how he perceives his surroundings. Another slight crossover genre of photography is that of the portrait photographer. While one may start taking photos of those around them in natural light, doing so may lead the photographer to look into using extra light which changes the image. Or a photographer's client may request that the photographer remove imperfections within the image such as stray hairs or acne, which while helpful to the subject does change the image.

This is not to say that lighting or changing the images in post is the only way to "make" and image. Regarding portrait photography again, there are many things the photographer can change before taking the picture that moves the image towards the made end of the spectrum including having the subject of the photograph go to certain locations, having them wear certain clothes or makeup, or even changing who the subject is. This can then go even further if the photographer chooses to, mostly through post processing. Using Photoshop or one of its many competitors for post processing is what truly allows the photographer to delve into the made photography spectrum, as using these programs allow skilled artists to manipulate the images in almost any way that they choose. This can be anything from changing colors to removing items in the frame to adding items to the frame, all of which allow the artist to show us their view of the world rather than just the world.

Both of found and made photography have their place within the world, and neither is initially better than the other. Without having both, the world of photography would be a much simpler and more boring world, and the art scene would be without some of the major game changers within the medium.
